README.md, before:

# evil-nix

This is a Nix library that allows you to download files from the internet
without needing to provide an output hash.  It even works in Nix's `pure-eval`
mode.

This library relies on Nix's support for SHA1, an unsafe hash function.  It
utilizes known SHA1 hash collisions in order to sneak single bits of data out
of fixed-output derivations.

This library is comically inefficient, and should never be used in any actual
codebase.  But it is a fun trick!

## Usage

This library provides an `evilDownloadUrl` function, which downloads the file
of the passed URL.

> **WARNING**: This `evilDownloadUrl` function is terribly inefficient.  It may
> use up all your disk space, and DOS the site you're trying to download from.
> I don't recommend using it to download a file larger than 50 bytes or so
> (unless you really know what you're doing).  The reason for this inefficiency
> is explained in the next section.

You can play around with this function in the Nix REPL:

```console
$ nix repl ./nix
nix-repl> :b evilDownloadUrl "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdepillabout/small-example-text-files/177c95e490cf44bcc42860bf0652203d3dc87900/hello-world.txt"

This derivation produced the following outputs:
  out -> /nix/store/jhyzz6l9ryjl1npdf4alqyi1fy2qx1f0-fetchBytes-6bba65f4567f4165109177a5dafd5972882643e15d454018586fed35b068acf5-12
```

And then you can confirm that this file actually contains the contents of the
URL:

```console
$ cat /nix/store/jhyzz6l9ryjl1npdf4alqyi1fy2qx1f0-fetchBytes-6bba65f4567f4165109177a5dafd5972882643e15d454018586fed35b068acf5-12
hello world
```

There is also a top-level `default.nix` that can be used to play around with
this function:

```console
$ nix-build --argstr url "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdepillabout/small-example-text-files/177c95e490cf44bcc42860bf0652203d3dc87900/hello.txt"
$ cat ./result
hello world
```

You can also use the [`flake.nix`](./flake.nix) file to play around with this.
First, edit `./flake.nix` and replace `url = "..."` with the URL you want to
download.  Then, build the default package in the flake:

```console
$ nix build
$ cat ./result
hello world
```

The neat (evil) thing about `evilDownloadUrl` is that it even works in Nix's
[`pure-eval`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file.html#conf-pure-eval)
mode.  In theory, `pure-eval` is supposed to require all downloaded files to
have a hash specified:

```console
$ nix build --pure-eval
$ cat ./result
hello world
```

### Extreme Inefficiency

Due to the way this hack works, `evilDownloadUrl` is extremely inefficient.
It does a request to the URL for every _bit_ (**!!**) of the file it is
trying to download.  For instance, if you were trying to download a
10 byte file, `evilDownloadUrl` would actually download the file _80_ times.

`evilDownloadUrl` also makes a lot of garbage in your Nix store.  Downloading a
50 byte file makes about 4MB of garbage in your Nix store.

It is also very slow.  Downloading a 50 byte file takes about 30 seconds on my
machine.

While this is a fun library, you should never use this in any actual codebase.

### Clean Up `/nix/store`

After playing around with `evilDownloadUrl`, you may want to clean up the
garbage in your Nix store.  While you should always be able to use
`nix-collect-garbage` to clean up your Nix store, you may want to specifically
only delete files created by `evilDownloadUrl`.

First, make sure you don't have the `result` output creating a GC root:

```console
$ rm ./result
```

Then, delete files created by `evilDownloadUrl`:

```console
$ shopt -s nullglob   # you may want to enable null globs in Bash to ignore globs that don't match
$ nix-store --delete /nix/store/*-bitvalue-* /nix/store/*BitNum-* /nix/store/*-fetchFileSize* /nix/store/*-fetchByte*
```

## How does this work?

The `evilDownloadUrl` function works by internally creating fixed-output
derivations which output one of two known files, both with the same SHA1 hash.
These fixed-output derivations are allowed to access the network, and output
one file to represent a single `1` bit, and the other file to represent a
single `0` bit.  This effectively leaks one bit of information from the
internet in a non-reproducible manner.

`evilDownloadUrl` combines many of these 1-bit-leaking fixed-output derivations
in order to download an entire file from the internet.

The next section is an introduction to Nix for a non-Nixer (or anyone that
needs a refresher), focusing on the concepts needed to explain how
`evilDownloadUrl` works. The section after is a longer, technical explanation
of how `evilDownloadUrl` works.

### Intro to Nix concepts for the non-Nixer

This section introduces the Nix concepts required for understanding `evil-nix`.
It does this mostly by drawing comparisons to other build tools, including
Docker.  These will be rough comparisions, intending to give you an idea about
what is going on without having to dive head-first into the inner-workings of
Nix.

> While these explanations are intended to give you some idea of what is going
> on, they may not be 100% completely technically accurate.  If you're a
> long-time Nix user, you're recommended to just jump directly to the following
> section.

Nix is quite a few different things.  It is a build tool and system daemon,
somewhat similar to `docker build` and `dockerd`.  It is also a programming
language, similar to the language used to write `Dockerfile`s (although more
powerful and composable).  There is a large set of packages defined in the Nix
language, called [`Nixpkgs`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs).  This is
somewhat similar to the Debian or Arch Linux package sets.  Although, because
of Nix's programability and composability, Nixpkgs feels much more powerful in
some ways to other Linux distro's package sets.

There is also a Linux distribution called NixOS, which uses the Nix programming
language to define system settings (for example, the contents of files in
`/etc`), and uses packages from Nixpkgs.  NixOS feels like a cross between a
normal Linux distribution and a tool like Ansible/Puppet/Chef.

In order to understand `evil-nix`, we only need to look at the Nix
the-programming-language and Nix the-build-tool.

The Nix programming language has a concept of a _derivation_.  A derivation is
a recipe to build a software package.  It is roughly similar to a `Dockerfile`.
Let's look at a simple derivation:

```console
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "hello-2.12.1";

  src = ./.;

  nativeBuildInputs = [ gcc make ];
}
```

This is a derivation to build the
[GNU Hello](https://www.gnu.org/software/hello/) program. It declares its name
and version, and takes the input source code from the current directory.  It
declares two needed build tools, `gcc` and `make`.

You may be wondering why there is no code explicitly calling `./configure &&
make && make install`.  The `mkDerivation` function has internal support for
checking if there is an Automake build system, and automatically runs these
commands for us.  Pretty convenient!  Nix of course allows you to specify any
arbitrary build commands you may want (similar to a `Dockerfile`), but in this
case it is not needed.

If this derivation is saved to a file in the current directory called
`hello.nix` (and the current directory also contains the source code for the
GNU Hello package), you should be able to build this derivation with a command
like the following:

> Note that this `./hello.nix` file is not a _real_ derivation, and you can't
> actually save it to disk and run it as-is.  It has been slightly modified to
> be easier to understand for people new to Nix.  Checkout one of the following
> tutorials an intro to writing real derivations:
>
> 1. [Your First Derivation](https://github.com/justinwoo/nix-shorts/blob/master/posts/your-first-derivation.md)
> 2. [Hacking Your First Package](https://nix-tutorial.gitlabpages.inria.fr/nix-tutorial/first-package.html)
> 3. [My first Nix derivation](https://www.adelbertc.com/first-nix-derivation/)

```console
$ nix-build ./hello.nix
```

This `nix-build` tool passes off the derivation to a system daemon.  The system
daemon starts up a sandbox, and pulls in all the declared build tools,
system libraries, and source code.  In our case, the only build tools that has
been declared and available in the sandbox are `gcc` and `make`.  The system
daemon then runs the specified build steps in the sandbox environment (which in
our case are `./configure && make && make install`).  After running a build,
the derivation is responsible for _outputting_ a file (or a directory
containing multiple files).  The output file is is known as the _output of the
derivation_ (or just "_output_").  The output of a derivation is generally
an ELF binary, HTML documentation, man pages, etc.

The sandbox is a key element here. The Nix system daemon sandbox is very
similar to the Docker daemon sandbox. However, the Nix system daemon goes one
step further.  It doesn't even allow network access.  Since network access is
not allowed during builds, you can be reasonably sure that your derivation is
100% reproducible. Regardless of what computer you run it on, it should always
succeed or fail the same way.

At this point, you may have the question, "Well, that's good and all, but if I
don't have network access, how do I download the source code I need to build? I
don't want to always have to keep the source code I want to build in my current
directory!"

To solve this problem, Nix provides a special type of derivation, called a
_fixed-output derivation_.  Here's an example of a fixed-output derivation:

```console
fetchurl {
    url = "https://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz";
    sha256 = "sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=";
}
```

Fixed-output derivations are special in that they require the hash of the
_output_ of the derivation to be specified in advance (the `sha256 =` line above). In
exchange for specifying the hash, the Nix system daemon sandbox allows access
to the network.  The above derivation will use `curl` to download the
`hello-2.12.1.tar.gz` file, and set it as the _output_ of this fixed-output
derivation.  This `hello-2.12.1.tar.gz` file must have the SHA256 hash
`sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=`.

Since the output hash is known, we can expect full 100% reproducibility of this
derivation.  If the derivation doesn't produce an output that exactly matches
the hash, then the Nix system daemon will get angry and fail the build.

Just like non-fixed-output derivations, fixed-output derivations allow you to
specify any arbitrary build commands you want.  The above `fetchurl` function
is setup to use `curl`, but you could potentially write a similar function that
internally uses `wget` instead.  Or maybe a derivation that uses `ftp` to pull
a file from an FTP server.

You can see that the above derivation uses a SHA256 hash.  Nix supports a few
different hash types, including SHA1.  `evil-nix` exploits the fact that SHA1
has known hash collisions.

In practice, the Nix language makes it very easy to combine multiple
derivations together.  For instance, the following Nix code is a normal
derivation for GNU Hello, where the source code for GNU Hello is taken as the
_output_ of a fixed-output derivation:

```console
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "hello-2.12.1";

  src = fetchurl {
    url = "https://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz";
    sha256 = "sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=";
  };

  nativeBuildInputs = [ gcc make ];
}
```

This ability to programmatically and easily combine different derivations makes
Nix quite useful!  (As an aside, both the `gcc` and `make` build inputs are
also just normal derivations, defined quite similarly to this GNU hello
derivation).

With this knowledge of normal _derivations_, _fixed-output derivations_, and
derivation _outputs_, you should be set to understand how `evil-nix` exploits
fixed-output derivations.

### Technical Explanation

The main trick in `evilDownloadUrl` is a fixed-output derivation that is able
to return one bit of (non-hashed) data from the internet.  This fixed-output
derivation works by preparing two different output files.  Let's call these
output files `pdfA` and `pdfB`.

These are special PDF files that have the same SHA1 hash.  The hash of the
fixed-output derivation is set to this SHA1 hash.  This works because Nix still
supports fixed-output derivations using SHA1 hashes (in the name of backwards
compatibility).

This fixed-output derivation takes a URL and a bit index as input. It downloads
the input URL using `curl`, and inspects the bit at the given input index of
the file. If the bit is a `1`, the fixed-output derivation sets `pdfA` as the
output. If the bit is a `0`, it sets `pdfB` as the output.

This is the critical trick.  From an information-theoretic perspective, you
would expect that a fixed-output derivation is not able to realistically
produce any additional information that is not already accounted for in the
hash of the output.  However, combining a fixed-output derivation and a hash
function with known collisions enables you to sneak out a single bit of data.

You can see what this fixed-output derivation looks like in the file
[`nix/evil/downloadBitNum.nix`](./nix/evil/downloadBitNum.nix).  This
derivation is refered to as `downloadBitNum` in the `evil-nix` codebase.

`downloadBitNum` is then wrapped with a simple (non-fixed-output) derivation
that inspects the output of `downloadBitNum`.  This simple derivation is
referred to as `fetchBit` in the codebase.

`fetchBit` inspects the output of `downloadBitNum` and sees whether it matches
`pdfA` or `pdfB`. If `pdfA` has been output, then `fetchBit` will create a
single output file with the contents of an ASCII `1` character.  If
`downloadBitNum` has output `pdfB`, then `fetchBit` will create a single output
file with the contents of an ASCII `2` character.

You can see what `fetchBit` looks like in the file
[`nix/evil/fetchBit.nix`](./nix/evil/fetchBit.nix).

`fetchBit` is then repeated 8 times, and the subsequent outputs combined to
form a full byte of the input URL.  This is done in the function `fetchByte`,
which is defined in [`nix/evil/fetchByte.nix`](./nix/evil/fetchByte.nix).

`fetchByte` is then repeated for each byte of the input file.  This is done in
the function `fetchBytes`, which is defined in
[`nix/evil/fetchBytes.nix`](./nix/evil/fetchBytes.nix).

`fetchBytes` outputs the full file we wanted to download from the input URL. By
utilizing fixed-output derivations with SHA1 collisions, we're able to download
all the individual bits of the input URL, and carefully reassemble them to form
the full file.

## Use Cases

## Does `evil-nix` pose a security-related problem to the Nix ecosystem?

No

## FAQ

1.  _Does this work with MD5 hashes instead of SHA1 hashes?_

## Acknowledgements


### blah

mention it works in both restricted eval and pure eval modes!

nix build -L --restrict-eval && cat ./result && rm ./result

and

nix build -L --pure-eval && cat ./result && rm ./result

command for deleting everything that has been downloaded:
rm -rf ./result;
shopt -s nullglob;
nix-store --delete /nix/store/*-bitvalue-* /nix/store/*BitNum-* /nix/store/*-fetchFileSize* /nix/store/*-fetchByte*

Commit message:

Add main use-case to readme

README.md, after:

# evil-nix

This is a Nix library that allows you to download files from the internet
without needing to provide an output hash.  It even works in Nix's `pure-eval`
mode.

This library relies on Nix's support for SHA1, an unsafe hash function.  It
utilizes known SHA1 hash collisions in order to sneak single bits of data out
of fixed-output derivations.

This library is comically inefficient, and should never be used in any actual
codebase.  But it is a fun trick!

## Usage

This library provides an `evilDownloadUrl` function, which downloads the file
of the passed URL.

> **WARNING**: This `evilDownloadUrl` function is terribly inefficient.  It may
> use up all your disk space, and DOS the site you're trying to download from.
> I don't recommend using it to download a file larger than 50 bytes or so
> (unless you really know what you're doing).  The reason for this inefficiency
> is explained in the next section.

You can play around with this function in the Nix REPL:

```console
$ nix repl ./nix
nix-repl> :b evilDownloadUrl "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdepillabout/small-example-text-files/177c95e490cf44bcc42860bf0652203d3dc87900/hello-world.txt"

This derivation produced the following outputs:
  out -> /nix/store/jhyzz6l9ryjl1npdf4alqyi1fy2qx1f0-fetchBytes-6bba65f4567f4165109177a5dafd5972882643e15d454018586fed35b068acf5-12
```

And then you can confirm that this file actually contains the contents of the
URL:

```console
$ cat /nix/store/jhyzz6l9ryjl1npdf4alqyi1fy2qx1f0-fetchBytes-6bba65f4567f4165109177a5dafd5972882643e15d454018586fed35b068acf5-12
hello world
```

There is also a top-level `default.nix` that can be used to play around with
this function:

```console
$ nix-build --argstr url "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdepillabout/small-example-text-files/177c95e490cf44bcc42860bf0652203d3dc87900/hello.txt"
$ cat ./result
hello world
```

You can also use the [`flake.nix`](./flake.nix) file to play around with this.
First, edit `./flake.nix` and replace `url = "..."` with the URL you want to
download.  Then, build the default package in the flake:

```console
$ nix build
$ cat ./result
hello world
```

The neat (evil) thing about `evilDownloadUrl` is that it even works in Nix's
[`pure-eval`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file.html#conf-pure-eval)
mode.  In theory, `pure-eval` is supposed to require all downloaded files to
have a hash specified:

```console
$ nix build --pure-eval
$ cat ./result
hello world
```

### Extreme Inefficiency

Due to the way this hack works, `evilDownloadUrl` is extremely inefficient.
It does a request to the URL for every _bit_ (**!!**) of the file it is
trying to download.  For instance, if you were trying to download a
10 byte file, `evilDownloadUrl` would actually download the file _80_ times.

`evilDownloadUrl` also makes a lot of garbage in your Nix store.  Downloading a
50 byte file makes about 4MB of garbage in your Nix store.

It is also very slow.  Downloading a 50 byte file takes about 30 seconds on my
machine.

While this is a fun library, you should never use this in any actual codebase.

### Clean Up `/nix/store`

After playing around with `evilDownloadUrl`, you may want to clean up the
garbage in your Nix store.  While you should always be able to use
`nix-collect-garbage` to clean up your Nix store, you may want to specifically
only delete files created by `evilDownloadUrl`.

First, make sure you don't have the `result` output creating a GC root:

```console
$ rm ./result
```

Then, delete files created by `evilDownloadUrl`:

```console
$ shopt -s nullglob   # you may want to enable null globs in Bash to ignore globs that don't match
$ nix-store --delete /nix/store/*-bitvalue-* /nix/store/*BitNum-* /nix/store/*-fetchFileSize* /nix/store/*-fetchByte*
```

## How does this work?

The `evilDownloadUrl` function works by internally creating fixed-output
derivations which output one of two known files, both with the same SHA1 hash.
These fixed-output derivations are allowed to access the network, and output
one file to represent a single `1` bit, and the other file to represent a
single `0` bit.  This effectively leaks one bit of information from the
internet in a non-reproducible manner.

`evilDownloadUrl` combines many of these 1-bit-leaking fixed-output derivations
in order to download an entire file from the internet.

The next section is an introduction to Nix for a non-Nixer (or anyone that
needs a refresher), focusing on the concepts needed to explain how
`evilDownloadUrl` works. The section after is a longer, technical explanation
of how `evilDownloadUrl` works.

### Intro to Nix concepts for the non-Nixer

This section introduces the Nix concepts required for understanding `evil-nix`.
It does this mostly by drawing comparisons to other build tools, including
Docker.  These will be rough comparisions, intending to give you an idea about
what is going on without having to dive head-first into the inner-workings of
Nix.

> While these explanations are intended to give you some idea of what is going
> on, they may not be 100% completely technically accurate.  If you're a
> long-time Nix user, you're recommended to just jump directly to the following
> section.

Nix is quite a few different things.  It is a build tool and system daemon,
somewhat similar to `docker build` and `dockerd`.  It is also a programming
language, similar to the language used to write `Dockerfile`s (although more
powerful and composable).  There is a large set of packages defined in the Nix
language, called [`Nixpkgs`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs).  This is
somewhat similar to the Debian or Arch Linux package sets.  Although, because
of Nix's programability and composability, Nixpkgs feels much more powerful in
some ways to other Linux distro's package sets.

There is also a Linux distribution called NixOS, which uses the Nix programming
language to define system settings (for example, the contents of files in
`/etc`), and uses packages from Nixpkgs.  NixOS feels like a cross between a
normal Linux distribution and a tool like Ansible/Puppet/Chef.

In order to understand `evil-nix`, we only need to look at the Nix
the-programming-language and Nix the-build-tool.

The Nix programming language has a concept of a _derivation_.  A derivation is
a recipe to build a software package.  It is roughly similar to a `Dockerfile`.
Let's look at a simple derivation:

```console
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "hello-2.12.1";

  src = ./.;

  nativeBuildInputs = [ gcc make ];
}
```

This is a derivation to build the
[GNU Hello](https://www.gnu.org/software/hello/) program. It declares its name
and version, and takes the input source code from the current directory.  It
declares two needed build tools, `gcc` and `make`.

You may be wondering why there is no code explicitly calling `./configure &&
make && make install`.  The `mkDerivation` function has internal support for
checking if there is an Automake build system, and automatically runs these
commands for us.  Pretty convenient!  Nix of course allows you to specify any
arbitrary build commands you may want (similar to a `Dockerfile`), but in this
case it is not needed.

If this derivation is saved to a file in the current directory called
`hello.nix` (and the current directory also contains the source code for the
GNU Hello package), you should be able to build this derivation with a command
like the following:

> Note that this `./hello.nix` file is not a _real_ derivation, and you can't
> actually save it to disk and run it as-is.  It has been slightly modified to
> be easier to understand for people new to Nix.  Checkout one of the following
> tutorials an intro to writing real derivations:
>
> 1. [Your First Derivation](https://github.com/justinwoo/nix-shorts/blob/master/posts/your-first-derivation.md)
> 2. [Hacking Your First Package](https://nix-tutorial.gitlabpages.inria.fr/nix-tutorial/first-package.html)
> 3. [My first Nix derivation](https://www.adelbertc.com/first-nix-derivation/)

```console
$ nix-build ./hello.nix
```

This `nix-build` tool passes off the derivation to a system daemon.  The system
daemon starts up a sandbox, and pulls in all the declared build tools,
system libraries, and source code.  In our case, the only build tools that has
been declared and available in the sandbox are `gcc` and `make`.  The system
daemon then runs the specified build steps in the sandbox environment (which in
our case are `./configure && make && make install`).  After running a build,
the derivation is responsible for _outputting_ a file (or a directory
containing multiple files).  The output file is is known as the _output of the
derivation_ (or just "_output_").  The output of a derivation is generally
an ELF binary, HTML documentation, man pages, etc.

The sandbox is a key element here. The Nix system daemon sandbox is very
similar to the Docker daemon sandbox. However, the Nix system daemon goes one
step further.  It doesn't even allow network access.  Since network access is
not allowed during builds, you can be reasonably sure that your derivation is
100% reproducible. Regardless of what computer you run it on, it should always
succeed or fail the same way.

At this point, you may have the question, "Well, that's good and all, but if I
don't have network access, how do I download the source code I need to build? I
don't want to always have to keep the source code I want to build in my current
directory!"

To solve this problem, Nix provides a special type of derivation, called a
_fixed-output derivation_.  Here's an example of a fixed-output derivation:

```console
fetchurl {
    url = "https://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz";
    sha256 = "sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=";
}
```

Fixed-output derivations are special in that they require the hash of the
_output_ of the derivation to be specified in advance (the `sha256 =` line above). In
exchange for specifying the hash, the Nix system daemon sandbox allows access
to the network.  The above derivation will use `curl` to download the
`hello-2.12.1.tar.gz` file, and set it as the _output_ of this fixed-output
derivation.  This `hello-2.12.1.tar.gz` file must have the SHA256 hash
`sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=`.

Since the output hash is known, we can expect full 100% reproducibility of this
derivation.  If the derivation doesn't produce an output that exactly matches
the hash, then the Nix system daemon will get angry and fail the build.

Just like non-fixed-output derivations, fixed-output derivations allow you to
specify any arbitrary build commands you want.  The above `fetchurl` function
is setup to use `curl`, but you could potentially write a similar function that
internally uses `wget` instead.  Or maybe a derivation that uses `ftp` to pull
a file from an FTP server.

You can see that the above derivation uses a SHA256 hash.  Nix supports a few
different hash types, including SHA1.  `evil-nix` exploits the fact that SHA1
has known hash collisions.

In practice, the Nix language makes it very easy to combine multiple
derivations together.  For instance, the following Nix code is a normal
derivation for GNU Hello, where the source code for GNU Hello is taken as the
_output_ of a fixed-output derivation:

```console
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "hello-2.12.1";

  src = fetchurl {
    url = "https://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz";
    sha256 = "sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=";
  };

  nativeBuildInputs = [ gcc make ];
}
```

This ability to programmatically and easily combine different derivations makes
Nix quite useful!  (As an aside, both the `gcc` and `make` build inputs are
also just normal derivations, defined quite similarly to this GNU hello
derivation).

With this knowledge of normal _derivations_, _fixed-output derivations_, and
derivation _outputs_, you should be set to understand how `evil-nix` exploits
fixed-output derivations.

### Technical Explanation

The main trick in `evilDownloadUrl` is a fixed-output derivation that is able
to return one bit of (non-hashed) data from the internet.  This fixed-output
derivation works by preparing two different output files.  Let's call these
output files `pdfA` and `pdfB`.

These are special PDF files that have the same SHA1 hash.  The hash of the
fixed-output derivation is set to this SHA1 hash.  This works because Nix still
supports fixed-output derivations using SHA1 hashes (in the name of backwards
compatibility).

This fixed-output derivation takes a URL and a bit index as input. It downloads
the input URL using `curl`, and inspects the bit at the given input index of
the file. If the bit is a `1`, the fixed-output derivation sets `pdfA` as the
output. If the bit is a `0`, it sets `pdfB` as the output.

This is the critical trick.  From an information-theoretic perspective, you
would expect that a fixed-output derivation is not able to realistically
produce any additional information that is not already accounted for in the
hash of the output.  However, combining a fixed-output derivation and a hash
function with known collisions enables you to sneak out a single bit of data.

You can see what this fixed-output derivation looks like in the file
[`nix/evil/downloadBitNum.nix`](./nix/evil/downloadBitNum.nix).  This
derivation is refered to as `downloadBitNum` in the `evil-nix` codebase.

`downloadBitNum` is then wrapped with a simple (non-fixed-output) derivation
that inspects the output of `downloadBitNum`.  This simple derivation is
referred to as `fetchBit` in the codebase.

`fetchBit` inspects the output of `downloadBitNum` and sees whether it matches
`pdfA` or `pdfB`. If `pdfA` has been output, then `fetchBit` will create a
single output file with the contents of an ASCII `1` character.  If
`downloadBitNum` has output `pdfB`, then `fetchBit` will create a single output
file with the contents of an ASCII `2` character.

You can see what `fetchBit` looks like in the file
[`nix/evil/fetchBit.nix`](./nix/evil/fetchBit.nix).

`fetchBit` is then repeated 8 times, and the subsequent outputs combined to
form a full byte of the input URL.  This is done in the function `fetchByte`,
which is defined in [`nix/evil/fetchByte.nix`](./nix/evil/fetchByte.nix).

`fetchByte` is then repeated for each byte of the input file.  This is done in
the function `fetchBytes`, which is defined in
[`nix/evil/fetchBytes.nix`](./nix/evil/fetchBytes.nix).

`fetchBytes` outputs the full file we wanted to download from the input URL.

By utilizing fixed-output derivations with SHA1 collisions, we're able to
download all the individual bits of the input URL, and carefully reassemble
them to form the full file.

## Use Cases

Due to the extreme inefficiency of `evilDownloadUrl`, the main use-case is not
for Nixers, but actually for non-Nix users.

If you're not a Nix user and you work in IT, I'm sure you have at least one
coworker who is _waaaay_ too into Nix.  They likely bring it up in every
conversation about your project's build system, CI, packaging, deployment, etc. You've
probably heard them say the word "reproducibility" about 15 times in just the
last week.

The main use-case of `evil-nix` is the following: next time you hear them start
to bring up Nix, hit them with "Eh, I heard Nix isn't _that_ great.  You can
trivially download un-hashed files."

They will likely start sputtering about sandboxes, unsafe hash functions, build
purity, composability, etc.  You can safely ignore them, and rest assured in
your current build system's mismatch of Makefiles, Bash scripts, YAML files,
and containers.

If they still won't take the hint, suggest to them that they should learn a
_real_ build system, like _Docker_.

## Does `evil-nix` pose a security-related problem to the Nix ecosystem?

No

## FAQ

1.  _Does this work with MD5 hashes instead of SHA1 hashes?_

## Acknowledgements


### blah

mention it works in both restricted eval and pure eval modes!

nix build -L --restrict-eval && cat ./result && rm ./result

and

nix build -L --pure-eval && cat ./result && rm ./result

command for deleting everything that has been downloaded:
rm -rf ./result;
shopt -s nullglob;
nix-store --delete /nix/store/*-bitvalue-* /nix/store/*BitNum-* /nix/store/*-fetchFileSize* /nix/store/*-fetchByte*
